code of conduct: Add election document (#3912)
kubernetes/community: committee-code-of-conduct/election.md

# Kubernetes Code of Conduct Committee Elections

This document outlines the process, for Code of Conduct Committee (CoCC) elections.

### Length of Terms

> * The CoCC consists of 5 members. In the first election, the top 3 voted people will be appointed for 2 year terms and the other 2 members will be appointed for a 1 year term.

Reviewer: I am fine with following the bootstrapping guide, where my seat would be 2 years instead of 1.

Author: It is the rules as written, even if the announcement of terms was mistaken.

### Eligibility for candidacy

* Candidate commits to putting the interests of the community above the interests of their employer for all Code of Conduct Committee activities.
* Is generally a responsible human
* Does not have to be part of the Kubernetes or CNCF community
* Characteristics which would be nice in any nominations:
  * Previous experience on an Ethics Committee or Code of Conduct Committee is appreciated
  * Has demonstrated integrity, professionalism, and positive influence within the community is appreciated
  * Experience with the tools which we use to communicate (Zoom, Slack, GitHub, etc.) within the Kubernetes community is appreciated

### Election process

The steering committee will announce a request for nominations some time in July from any member of the following:
* steering committee
* sig chair
* sig lead

The committee will accept nominations for at least 3 weeks. After the announced nomination
period the steering committee will hold a private ballot election using time-limited
[Condorcet] ranking use the [Schulze method] to break ties. The steering committee
will publicly announce the results of the election.

### Maximal representation

> Since we require commitment that all members of the committee put the interests

Reviewer: It may be worth saying, "Since we require commitment... while performing all duties related to the CoCC, _or they are required to recuse themselves_" Or something along those lines.

Just a pointer to our charter where we explain that recusal is an option.

Author: I made a pointer to recusal. Though if a person is not able to publicly say they will put the community before their employer I don't think they belong on the committee at all.

Reviewer 2: I'm still wary at the prospect of a mono-employer committee here.  Our other two committees explicitly call this out, why not here?

Reviewer 3: +1 to @spiffxp - I also think we should have the same representation requirement here as we do on the steering committee. We also expect steering to put the community's interest above all as part of their responsibility to the k8s community but still have the max representation limitations as safeguards.

Author: Do we actually write down that steering (or any leader?) must put the interest of the community over the interest of their employer? I haven't seen it, and I've looked.

Are there other open source communities that disqualify otherwise exceptional individuals from participation based solely on employment? I'm not sure of one. Certainly not the 2 largest I can think of, kernel and OpenStack.

The only reason employer based disqualification makes any sense if if the human individuals involved are acting as proxies for their employer, instead of acting in the best interest of the community. And if they are doing so they certainly don't belong on a CoCC, or in any community leadership role in my opinion.

The very idea that because 2 people work for the same large corporation that they must think or act similarly is not rational even on it's face. Especially given the size of some of the companies in question. Personally, I don't even know the names of some of the Red Hatters who work on kubernetes and we certainly don't have shared goals or direction. We don't even have a manager in common until you get to the CEO. They are no closer to me or likely to share a thought echo chamber than anyone else in the community. And they should not be disqualified from participation if they are the best.

I think the CoCC is a good place to start fixing the idea that employment and community participation should somehow be mutually exclusive. Especially since the CoCC is the most important place to keep employment politics out of the activities.

Reviewer 2: @eparis Yes, steering wrote this down https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/values.md#community-over-product-or-company

I still think a safeguard is necessary

Reviewer 4: I can see cases where:
- the person reporting a CoC violation would prefer to work the case with someone who is not from the same employer as themselves, or the person they are accusing of a violation
- the person being accused of a CoC violation would prefer that the case is worked by someone who is not of the same employer as themselves, or the person accusing them of a violation

This isn't just to protect against *actual* conflicts of interest, as it's very clear that individuals in this role should be placing the interests of the community above that of their employer, but it's also to protect against any *perceived* conflict of interest, either internally or externally.

This particular issue is only a problem if most or all of the CoCC is from the same employer. Where you have a diverse committee (in many ways, but in this case, of employer), it's easy to correct and hand a particular case off to a different individual if there is ever any concerns raised that deal with a perceived conflict of interest around the employer of a CoCC member.

Reviewer 5: There's a couple other reasons we need to have multiple companies represented:

1. If the CoC incident is *also* considered an HR incident for the employer of the accused violator, then their coworkers may be legally unable to take action inside the CoCC due to employment rules.  This could leave us without any members of the committee able to take action on an incident.

2. Just about everyone has an unconscious bias towards giving their coworkers the benefit of the doubt.  While CoCC members will consciously try to be impartial, in cases where the injured parties and the violator have different employers, having one of the other share an employer with the entire committee could result in partisan outcomes despite people's best efforts.

Reviewer 5: Hah, I just realized that I'm proving @eparis's point that working for the same employer doesn't mean concordence.

However ... Openstack *did* have employer representation rules, they just eliminated a lot of them when the project shrank and so did the pool of employers.

Reviewer 6: I support the points both @cblecker and @jberkus have made -- even with the most impeccable of members on the board, folks may want or need to recuse themselves due to either internal HR issues or to avoid the perception of impropriety. And, yes, in OpenStack, we had similar constraints in place on several steering committees.

How about this: maximal representation of a single employer is (quorum - 1).

So, with a 5 person committee, that's 2 people from the same company. This avoids a potential situation where, when all employees at a company need to recuse themselves, the committee is unable to make any decisions. Additionally, it necessitates that at least 3 companies are represented on the CoCC.

of the community above the interest of their employer while performing all duties

> related to the CoCC we do not have a maximal corperate representation limit.

Reviewer: s/corperate/corporate

Author: fixed.

### Terms and Election Cycles

> Code of Conduct Committee members are elected to serve two year terms.

Reviewer: This contradicts the 2/1 year term wording under the length of terms section above. What if this section was limited to just Election Cycles and we don't repeat ourselves on term length?

Author: fixed, I hope

Election cycles are scheduled such that roughly half of the seats come up for
re-election each year for purposes of continuity.  The exact number of seats
alternates between 2 and 3.

### Emeritus Term

There is no concept of an "Emeritus Term" with the CoCC. When a member vacates
their seat for any reason they will be removed from all conversations, e-mail
lists, historical data, and any other activities related to the CoCC.

### Vacancies

In the event of a resignation or other loss of an elected committee
member, the candidate with the next most votes from the previous election will
be offered the seat.  This process will continue until the seat is filled.

In case this fails to fill the seat, a special election for that position will
be held as soon as possible. Eligible voters from the most recent election
will vote in the special election (ie: eligibility will not be redetermined
at the time of the special election). A committee member elected in a special
election will serve out the remainder of the term for the person they are
replacing, regardless of the length of that remainder.

> In the event that the committee votes to disolve in it's entirety an entirely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event that the committee votes to dissolve in its entirety, an entirely
```

* In all subsequent elections the term will be for 2 years.
* In alternating years either 2 or 3 seats will be up for election as terms expire.

### Eligibility for voting

* Voting will be done by members of the steering committee.

### Eligibility for candidacy

* Candidate commits to putting the interests of the community above the interests of their employer for all Code of Conduct Committee activities.
* Is generally a responsible human
* Does not have to be part of the Kubernetes or CNCF community
* Characteristics which would be nice in any nominations:
  * Previous experience on an Ethics Committee or Code of Conduct Committee is appreciated
  * Has demonstrated integrity, professionalism, and positive influence within the community is appreciated
  * Experience with the tools which we use to communicate (Zoom, Slack, GitHub, etc.) within the Kubernetes community is appreciated

### Election process

The steering committee will announce a request for nominations some time in July from any member of the following:
* steering committee
* sig chair

> * sig lead

Reviewer 3: Can we change `sig lead` to `sig tech lead` for more clarity?
Should current CoCC members be eligible to nominate people?

Author: fixed.

> The committee will accept nominations for at least 3 weeks. After the announced nomination

Reviewer 3: Let's change this to `accept nomination for at least 1 week and a maximum of 3 weeks`. I think I originally proposed 3 weeks but now am re-thinking how much time is actually needed.

Author: Updated to say 'at least 1 week, though steering may choose to accept for longer'.  the `3` is dropped entirely.

will publicly announce the results of the election.

### Maximal representation

Since we require commitment that all members of the committee put the interests
of the community above the interest of their employer, or [recuse themselves] from all
relevant proceedings,  while performing all duties related to the CoCC we do not
have a maximal corporate representation limit.

### Election Cycles

Election cycles are scheduled such that roughly half of the seats come up for
re-election each year for purposes of continuity.  The exact number of seats
alternates between 2 and 3. The elections by the steering committee should be
held and announced before the previous appointments expire (typically in Aug).

### Emeritus Term

There is no concept of an "Emeritus Term" with the CoCC. When a member vacates
their seat for any reason they will be removed from all conversations, e-mail
lists, historical data, and any other activities related to the CoCC.

### Vacancies

In the event of a resignation or other loss of an elected committee
member, the candidate with the next most votes from the previous election will

> be offered the seat.  This process will continue until the seat is filled.

Reviewer 7: What are the chances this results in a member with a very small number of votes for being granted the position?

Author: the alternative being steering holds an ad-hoc vote?

Reviewer 7: Or a snap election?  Or control the depth of the election stack (i.e. first alternate / second alternate)?

Reviewer 8: i think a special run-off election is probably the best outcome.

Author: I see 2 votes for a snap election instead of taking the next on the list (what steering does). If steering wants to potentially do more elections I'm happier with that too.

> a# Kubernetes Code of Conduct Committee Elections

Reviewer 4: I think the "a" here was added in error @carolynvs 
```suggestion
# Kubernetes Code of Conduct Committee Elections
```

### Vacancies

In the event of a resignation or other loss of an elected committee
member, the candidate with the next most votes from the previous election will
be offered the seat.  This process will continue until the seat is filled.

In case this fails to fill the seat, a special election for that position will
be held as soon as possible. Eligible voters from the most recent election
will vote in the special election (ie: eligibility will not be redetermined
at the time of the special election). A committee member elected in a special
election will serve out the remainder of the term for the person they are
replacing, regardless of the length of that remainder.

In the event that the committee votes to dissolve in its entirety an entirely
new special election will he held by the steering committee instead of filling
with names from the previous election. Those elected will complete the remaining
terms of the previous, dissolved, committee. With those receiving the highest
votes receiving the longest term.

[Condorcet]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Condorcet_method
[Schulze method]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schulze_method

> [recuse temselves]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/committee-code-of-conduct/charter.md#incident-response-recusal

Reviewer 9: Looks like this link isn't being used anywhere in the doc...

# Kubernetes Code of Conduct Committee Elections

This document outlines the process, for Code of Conduct Committee (CoCC) elections.

### Length of Terms

* The CoCC consists of 5 members. In the first election, the top 3 voted people will be appointed for 2 year terms and the other 2 members will be appointed for a 1 year term.
* In all subsequent elections the term will be for 2 years.
* In alternating years either 2 or 3 seats will be up for election as terms expire.

### Eligibility for voting

> * Voting will be done by members of the steering committee.

Reviewer 9: From https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/3912/files#r309490546:

> I read this as saying steering committee membership does not prevent code of conduct committee membership (or vice-versa).

In this case, to cover all bases, we could perhaps add a line or two about recusal from voting in case a Steering Committee member is running for the CoCC election?

### Eligibility for candidacy

* Candidate commits to putting the interests of the community above the interests of their employer for all Code of Conduct Committee activities.
* Is generally a responsible human

> * Does not have to be part of the Kubernetes or CNCF community

Reviewer 2: I'd like to understand this one a little better.  We expect this of our leadership roles in all other community groups, why not here?

Reviewer 3: The general idea is we can leverage expertise in the area of code of conduct from other communities by not explicitly requiring someone to be part of the k8s and cncf community. For example, it'd be great if someone from the Mozilla community which has lots of experience and expertise developing CoC processes came along to be part of our CoCC. The folks that are deeply involved in Kubernetes/CNCF may not be the same people who have a background in CoC issues and removing the requirement that these people have to come from our specific community will open up the possibility to having a more diverse and well versed CoCC.

Reviewer 2: Sourcing from outside of our echo chamber makes sense, and I agree outside perspective is a healthy check.  So, for eligibility for candidacy, makes sense, LGTM

Once elected, they need to be members for all of our tooling (and ideally awareness of how this community operates), which I think we all know, I just couldn't find it spelled out anywhere.  Can address in a followup.

Reviewer 2: Also, just so I'm explicitly clear: I read this as saying steering committee membership does not prevent code of conduct committee membership (or vice-versa).  The membership of the two committees is mutually exclusive today, but nothing in the charters or election docs prevents that from changing.  Correct?

Author: There is nothing that I can find which says they are mutually exclusive today. I'm not sure why they need be.

  * Has demonstrated integrity, professionalism, and positive influence within the community is appreciated
  * Experience with the tools which we use to communicate (Zoom, Slack, GitHub, etc.) within the Kubernetes community is appreciated

### Election process

The steering committee will announce a request for nominations some time in July from any member of the following:
* steering committee
* members of the code of conduct committee
* sig chair
* sig tech lead

The steering committee will accept nominations for at least 1 week. Though the steering
committee may choose to accept nominations for longer.  After the announced nomination
period the steering committee will hold a private ballot election using time-limited
[Condorcet] ranking use the [Schulze method] to break ties. The steering committee
will publicly announce the results of the election.

### Maximal representation

Since we require commitment that all members of the committee put the interests
of the community above the interest of their employer, or [recuse themselves] from all
relevant proceedings,  while performing all duties related to the CoCC we do not

> have a maximal corporate representation limit.

Reviewer 5: I don't see anything in here about other kinds of representation.  Given the job of the CoCC, I'm concerned about the possiblity that the committee could lack other kinds of diversity.  For example, it's been demonstrated repeatedly that all-male CoCCs often fail to adequately empathize with women targets of harassment, and then fail to adequately investigate incidents.  I feel like the CoCC, because of its special role in the community, needs to have some minimal diversity requirements that go beyond employer.
